Add explainer with basic API proposal. (#1)
khushalsagar/navigation-transitions: explainer.md

# Introduction

> Smooth visual transitions as users navigate on the web can lower cognitive load by helping users stay in context. It can also provide a [visual cue](https://www.wired.com/2014/04/swipe-safari-ios-7/) about the destination before initiating the navigation. Both site authors and UAs add visual transitions to their navigations for these use-cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smooth visual transitions as users navigate on the web can lower cognitive load by helping users stay in context. It can also provide a [visual cue](https://www.wired.com/2014/04/swipe-safari-ios-7/) about the destination before initiating the navigation. Both site authors and user-agents (UAs) add visual transitions to their navigations for these use-cases.
```

> However, the user experience is bad if [both the site author and the UA](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/19662434/in-ios-7-safari-how-do-you-differentiate-popstate-events-via-edge-swipe-vs-the) add these transitions. The goal of this proposal is to avoid such cases to ensure only one visual transition is executed at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the user experience is bad if [both the site author and the UA](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/19662434/in-ios-7-safari-how-do-you-differentiate-popstate-events-via-edge-swipe-vs-the) add these transitions: the transitions may conflict and cause confusion for the user. The goal of this proposal is to avoid such cases to ensure only one visual transition is executed at a time.
```

The ethos guiding the API design are:

> * If a visual transition can be defined by both the site author and the UA, the site author takes precendence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If a visual transition can be defined by both the site author and the UA, the site author takes precendence since they have a better understanding of the design and functionality of their site.
```

* Same vs Cross-Document (Same-Origin): Whether site authors can customize a transition today and which APIs are necessary to support customization depends on whether the navigation is same-document or cross-document.

* Same vs Cross-origin: Customization of visual transition when navigating between cross-origin sites should either not be supported or should be extremely limited for security/privacy concerns.

The table below shows the current state for the cross-section of these cases:

* ✅ are cases which are currently customizable.
* ☑ are cases which should be customizable but require new platform APIs.
* ❌ are cases which should not be customizable

|   | Same-Document  |  Cross-Document Same-Origin | Cross-Origin  |
|---|---|---|---|
| Swipe Navigation | ☑ | ☑ | ❌ |
| Atomic Navigation  | ✅ | ☑ | ❌ |

The platform APIs required for cases marked with ☑ are:

> * Gesture API: Most platforms have a swipe gesture which is used by the UA to trigger a back/forward navigation. On Android/iOS its swiping from the screen edge; on Mac, its multi-finger swipe. Site authors currently can not consistently intercept these events. Customizing swipe navigations for both same-document and cross-document navigations requires this[^1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Gesture API: Most platforms have a swipe gesture which is used by the UA to trigger a back/forward navigation. On Android/iOS the gesture is swiping from the screen edge; on Mac, it's a multi-finger swipe. Site authors currently can not consistently intercept these events. Customizing swipe navigations for both same-document and cross-document navigations requires this[^1].
```

* Persisting Visual State: The transition requires showing visual state from both before/after the navigation. Site authors can do this for same-document navigations but not cross-document. [ViewTransition](https://github.com/WICG/view-transitions/blob/main/explainer.md#cross-document-same-origin-transitions) addresses this gap.

> The exact details for the above APIs is out of scope for this proposal. These are meant to show that there are cases which are currently not customizable by site authors but will be going forward. The API proposals here should work well if/when one of these cases becomes customizable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The details for the above APIs are out of scope for this proposal. These are meant to show that there are cases which are currently not customizable by site authors but may become so going forward. The API proposal here should work well if/when one of these cases becomes customizable.
```

# Problem Statement

> There is currently no way for a site to indicate that it has a custom visual transition tied to a navigation. For example, if the UA adds a visual transition for an atomic navigation (like clicking the back button), there is no way for the UA and site-author to coordinate the 2 transitions. The results in 2 category of issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is currently no way for a site author to indicate that the page has a custom visual transition tied to a navigation. For example, if the UA adds a visual transition for an atomic navigation (like clicking the back button), there is no way for the UA and site-author to coordinate the 2 transitions. The results in 2 category of issues:
```

* Double transitions: Executing both the UA and author defined visual transitions looks like a visual glitch. This [site](https://darkened-relieved-azimuth.glitch.me) shows the issue on Chrome/Safari iOS and Safari on Mac. The site does a cross-fade when the user goes back:

   * If the user navigates using the back button in the UI, a cross-fade defined by the site executes and is the only transition.

   * If the user navigates using a swipe from the edge (iOS) or 2 finger swipe (mac), the UA does a transition showing content of the back entry. The Document then receives a `popState` event for the navigation and performs another visual transition.
   

>    This has *compat risk* if the UA adds visual transitions for navigations which can be implicitly customized by the site author, i.e., same-document navigations. This is not a problem for cross-document navigations since customization requires UA primitives like ViewTransitions. The UA can use this to detect if there are custom transitions and give them precedence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This has *compat risk* if the UA adds visual transitions for navigations which can be implicitly customized by the site author, i.e., same-document navigations. This is not a problem for cross-document navigations since customization requires UA primitives like [ViewTransitions](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-view-transitions-1/). The UA can use this to detect if there are custom transitions and give them precedence.
```

> * Sub-optimal UX: It's possible that the transition UX defined by the UA is not ideal given the DOM change associated with a navigation. For example, scrolling to a different position in the same Document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Sub-optimal user experience (UX): It's possible that the transition UX defined by the UA is not ideal given the DOM change associated with a navigation (e.g. scrolling to a different position in the same Document).
```

   This can be resolved by giving precedence to author defined transitions over UA transitions if the case is customizable. For cases which can't be customized yet (like swipe navigations), it's unclear whether no visual transition is better than the UA default.

# Proposals
## Choosing between UA and Custom Transition

> This proposal provides authors control over whether a same-document navigation performs a UA transition. The base primitive is a setting called `same-doc-ua-transition` with the following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal provides authors control over whether a same-document navigation performs a UA transition. The base primitive is a setting called `same-document-ua-transition` with the following options:
```

* `disable-atomic`: Disables UA transitions for atomic navigations.
* `disable-swipe`: Disables UA transitions for swipe navigations.

> The value is a space seperated list of options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value can take on any number of options (none, one, or both).
```

I don't know if we're mandating space separated list here.. I don't really this matters

Author: This seems fine. Subsequent sections give more detail on what the default is (when none are presented). This feels like something that's easier to describe with syntax.

### Default Value

> The default value for this setting assumes that UA transitions should be an opt-out, i.e. the UA can do a visual transition for any navigation but sites can opt-out of them (likely in favour of a custom transition). Opt-out does have the compat issue of causing double transitions for sites which already have custom transitions. But it allows browser UX to be consistent for same-document vs cross-document navigations. This also aligns with the behaviour in Webkit based browsers which already ship with UA transitions for every swipe navigation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default value for this setting assumes that UA transitions is an opt-out. In other words, the UA can do a visual transition for any navigation but site authors can opt pages out of them, likely in favour of a custom transition.

Opt-out does come with the compat risk of causing double transitions for sites which already have custom transitions. However, it allows browser UX to be consistent for same-document vs cross-document navigations. This also aligns with the behaviour in WebKit based browsers which already ship with UA transitions for swipe navigations.
```

I wonder if we can reduce some of these arguments to be more concise

Author: I moved the argument to a new paragraph. The argument text is ok but it was in the same paragraph as the the explanation for what opt-out means which made it sound like a big wall of text.

> An opt-in avoids the compat risk but conservatively disables UA transition on sites which don't have custom transitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An opt-in avoids this compat risk but conservatively disables UA transition on sites which don't have custom transitions.
```

> Note: Ideally we'd want consistent behaviour across browsers here but if its not feasible, the default value can also be left to the UA.

Reviewer: Remove this line? I'm not sure what it's getting at

Author: That we have a cop out in case there's disagreement. But that's the last resort which we will actively try to avoid so let's remove it.

### Handling Swipes
In the absence of a Gesture API for customizing swipes, authors can use this API to handle swipes in the following ways:

1. Add `disable-swipe` which means no visual transition occurs during the gesture. The site instead does a visual transition when the navigation commits (using the `popState` or `navigate` event). This could be sub-optimal for users since they can't use the previous page's preview to decide whether the navigation should occur.

>    However, it's unlikely that authors will do this unless a custom transition when the navigation commits is strictly better than the default UA transition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   However, this is an intentional author request, meaning it's likely the page has a custom transition when the navigation commits and it is more desirable than the UA default.
```

> 2. Omit `disable-swipe` which allows the UA to do a visual transition during the gesture. The author can detect this using the API described in [Detecting UA Transition](#detecting-ua-transition).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Omit `disable-swipe` which allows the UA to do a visual transition during the gesture. The author can detect the transition using the API described in [Detecting UA Transition](#detecting-ua-transition).
```

### Global vs Navigation Based

> `same-doc-ua-transition` could be a global setting that applies to all same-document navigations originating from the current Document, or configured based on the source/destination URL. This depends on whether authors have custom transitions for a subset of navigations, or whether the behavior for swipes is set different based on the destination page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choice of whether to make `same-document-ua-transition` a global setting that applies to all same-document navigations originating from the current Document, or be configured based on the source/destination URL is also important.

The decision depends on whether authors tend to have custom transitions for a subset of navigations, or whether the behavior for swipes is typically different based on the destination page.
```

> The author could simply update the value of the global setting based on what's in the navigation history, but the following cases are still infeasible:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The author could, of course, update the value of the global setting based on what's in the navigation history, but the following cases would still remain infeasible:
```

* The setting needs to be different for the back and forward entries.

> * Browser UI allows the user to traverse multiple entries, so back/fwd can jump to any entry in the navigation history.

Author: ```suggestion
* Browser UI allows the user to traverse multiple entries, so back/forward can jump to any entry in the navigation history.
```

* The user navigates to a new URL by pasting in the URL bar.

> The proposal is to specify this using pair of URLs, which are the source/destination URLs for the navigation. This would effectively be a list of dictionaries which is 1:1 with a Document as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal is to specify the setting using pair of URLs: the source and destination URLs for the navigation. Effectively, the setting is a list of dictionaries as described in the following example:
```

Author: I reworded this to make it clear that this is not the current proposal. Just something we want to ensure can be supported.

```

> [{

Reviewer: The thing we briefly talked about was having something like
```
{
   from urlPattern("/articles/*") {
      to urlPattern("/index") {
           same-doc-ua-transition: disable-swipe disable-atomic;
      },
      to urlPattern("/another_index") {
           same-doc-ua-transition: disable-swipe;
      }
   }
}
```
although I suspect that's overkill. In fact, I'm kind of thinking that maybe we should just have a global without to/from things, because I'm not sure how strong the use case is for that

Author: +1. Let's keep this in mind so that the syntax we pick is extendible to do URL based setting.

   from: urlPattern("/articles/*");
   to: urlPattern("/index");
   same-doc-ua-transition: disable-swipe disable-atomic;
 },
 {
   same-doc-ua-transition: disable-atomic;

>  }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 }]
```

```

Specifying the URL builds on the existing [URLPattern](https://wicg.github.io/urlpattern/) concept. Similar to the [specificty](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) concept in CSS, the list value applied should be chosen based on how narrowly scoped the rule is to a navigation. TODO: Clarify the exact algorithm for this.

The destination URL must be the value before redirects. This is because the setting is applied when the swipe gesture starts, before the navigation is initiated (which will resolve redirects).

### CSS API
The following options are for a CSS based syntax for this API. The current proposal is [Option 1](#option-1).

#### Option 1
A new CSS [at-rule](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) as described below:

```css
/* Applies to all same-document navigations from this Document */
@ua-transition {

>   same-doc-ua-transition: disable-atomic;

Reviewer: For css, you also need to propose a default value when "nothing is specified"

Author: Done.

* Swipe (predictive) vs Atomic: An atomic navigation would be clicking a button in the browser UI or a programmatic navigation via [`history.pushState`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History/pushState). A swipe navigation would be gesture which shows the user a preview of the destination before initiating the navigation. This is also called predictive navigation since the user can choose to initiate the navigation based on the preview.

* Same vs Cross-Document (Same-Origin): Whether site authors can customize a transition today and which APIs are necessary to support customization depends on whether the navigation is same-document or cross-document.

* Same vs Cross-origin: Customization of visual transition when navigating between cross-origin sites should either not be supported or should be extremely limited for security/privacy concerns.

The table below shows that currently only same-document atomic navigations can be customized.

|   | Same-Document  |  Cross-Document Same-Origin | Cross-Origin  |
|---|---|---|---|

> | Swipe Navigation | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ |

Author: Add indication for which ones will be customizable with a yellow sign. Also a footnote to show the API dependency.

| Atomic Navigation  | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |

Ideally all same-origin navigations should be customizable but the following API gaps remain to enable that:

* Gesture API: Most platforms have a swipe gesture which is used by the UA to trigger a back/forward navigation. On Android/iOS its swiping from the screen edge; on Mac, its multi-finger swipe. Site authors currently can not consistently intercept these events. Customizing swipe navigations for both same-document and cross-document navigations requires this[^1].

* Persisting Visual State: The transition requires showing visual state from both before/after the navigation. Site authors can do this for same-document navigations but not cross-document. [ViewTransition](https://github.com/WICG/view-transitions/blob/main/explainer.md#cross-document-same-origin-transitions) addresses this gap.

The exact details for the above APIs is out of scope for this proposal. These are meant to show that there are cases which are currently not customizable by site authors but will be going forward. The API proposals here should work well if/when one of these cases becomes customizable.

> # Problem Statement

Author: In the absence of the gesture API, site should be able to disable default swipe for cross-document case also.

> There is currently no way for a site to indicate that it has a custom transition which should override the default UA transition. For example, if the UA adds a visual transition for an atomic navigations (like clicking the back button) which the site has also customized.

Author: typo: navigation

> There is currently no way for a site to indicate that it has a custom transition which should override the default UA transition. For example, if the UA adds a visual transition for an atomic navigations (like clicking the back button) which the site has also customized.

Author: , there is no way for the UA and site-author to coordinate the 2 transitions.

## Same-Document Navigations
For same-document navigations the UA can not detect whether a site will execute a visual transition for a navigation. Also, while the site can not currently customize the swipe gesture, it may still do a visual transition when the navigation is eventually committed. Adding UA transitions for these navigations has a compat risk of "double transitions". This [site](https://darkened-relieved-azimuth.glitch.me) shows the issue on Chrome/Safari iOS and Safari on Mac. The site does a cross-fade when the user goes back:

* If the user navigates using the back button in the UI, a cross-fade defined by the site executes and is the only transition.

* If the user navigates using a swipe from the edge (iOS) or 2 finger swipe (mac), the UA does a transition showing content of the back entry. The Document then receives a `popState` event for the navigation and performs another visual transition.

## Cross-Document Navigations

> This is not a problem for cross-document navigations since customization requires UA primitives. The UA can use this to detect if there are custom transitions and give them precedence. For example:

Author: Cross-document navigations don't have the same problems as same-document navigations since...

> * Since atomic navigations will require a ViewTransition, the UA transition is suppressed only if the current Document has an opt-in for ViewTransitions for a navigation.

Author: "... is suppressed if there is a ViewTransition for a navigation."

> * Since swipe navigations will require a combination of a Gesture API + ViewTransition, the UA transition is suppressed only if the current Document has an opt-in for both. If there is an opt-in for only one of them and a swipe occurs, the opt-in is ignored.

Author: "is suppressed if the UA transition uses both".

# Proposals

> ## Choosing between UA and Custom Transition

Author: Update the proposal to specify 2 options: disable-swipe, disable-atomic. Default can be explicit or up to UA based on browser feedback.

The other problem is whether this is global or dependent on the source/dest URL + type of navigation. VT needs to specify an opt-in with the same params, should use the same technique.

This API provides authors control over whether a same-document navigation uses a UA vs custom visual transition. A global setting called `same-document-ua-transition` is introduced with the following options:

> * `disable`: Suppresses UA transitions for all navigations.

Author: Remove disable option.

* `enable`: Enables UA transitions for all navigations.

> * `enable-atomic`: Enables UA transitions for atomic navigations only.

Author: Flip these to disable-* options.

* `enable-swipe`: Enables UA transitions for swipe navigations only.

> * `auto`: Allows the UA to decide which navigations get a UA transition.

Author: Explain that auto is an escape hatch if we don't align on compatible behaviour.

`auto` is the default value for this setting. This allows UAs to make different decisions based on their current behaviour. For example, Safari already ships with transitions on swipe gestures; changing that would surprise users.

> Question: It seems awkward to have this setting dictate behaviour for swipes. Especially since the Gesture API for swipes will need their own opt-in.

Author: If a swipe API like this existed, here's how I would think about this:

* The swipe API has its own opt-in, maybe through an event listener, which decides whether you're customizing that case. Its possible that you decide not to take over the swipe when the event is dispatched, in which case its as if you didn't opt-in.
* `same-document-ua-transition` setting is a global setting which tells the UA if you have any transitions at all, with just 2 values: enable and disable.
* If the value is enable, UA defaults always win and you don't get swipe events.
* If the value is disable but you haven't opted-in to the swipe API, then UA transitions win for swipe but nothing else.
* If the value is disable and you have opted-in to the swipe API, then no UA transitions on all navigations.

This is trying to follow a pattern similar to cross-document navigations. If the author has to rely on a primitive to do the transition, we can detect customization based on whether the site is using that primitive.

Author: Btw the default value we choose can be up for debate. I suspect we'll need `auto` since differences between browsers means we might not align on what the default should be.

## Detecting UA Transition

> For cases where the site is using `auto`, this tells the author whether a UA has already executed a visual transition for a navigation:

Author: Clarify that this is dispatches after the visual transition has occurred.
